We continue our sermon series this morning in unlikely Lent.
And during this Lenten season, we are turning our attention to the ways in which God is trying to prepare us to arrive at Easter.
At Easter we're invited to be changed, to be transformed, to be delivered.
We don't just show up for Easter, but there is a journey to Easter called the Lenten season.
And today we're journeying deep into the Lenten season as we encounter Peter and Jesus in a pickle.
in a bind, in a situation.
So let us go to the Gospel of Mark this morning, and I'm gonna invite you to stand for the reading of the Gospel in body or in spirit, wherever you are.
Stand this morning as we read from the Gospel of Mark, the 14th chapter, verses 53 through 72.
I'm reading from the new Revised Standard Version, the updated edition.
And I want to tell you here that Jesus has told the disciples all the things that are about to happen, leading up to Easter, to the resurrection.
And there was a dinner that we're gonna re-enact in a few minutes.
There was a dinner, a Passover supper.
It was supposed to be regular.
It was supposed to be ordinary, but Jesus flipped the script and told us some things that were important.
He told Peter, before this night is over, three times, you will deny me.
And Peter said, oh no, I won't, I love you Lord.
Nobody loves you more than me.
And Jesus said, Peter, before this night is over, you will deny me and the cock will crow three times.
And Peter said, not me, not me.
And then in the 53rd verse of the 14th chapter of Mark, we read these words.
They took Jesus to the high priest, and all the chief priests, the elders and the scribes were assembled.
Peter had followed him at a distance right into the courtyard of the high priest, and he was sitting with the guards warming himself at the fire.
Now the chief priest and the whole council were looking for testimony against Jesus to put him to death, but they found none.
For many gave false testimony against him, and their testimony did not agree.
Some stood up and gave false testimony saying, we heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands.
And in three days I will build another not made with hands.
But even on this point, their testimony did not agree.
Then the high priest stood up before them and asked Jesus, have you no answer?
What is it that they testify against you?
But Jesus was silent and did not answer.
Again, the high priest asked him, are you the Messiah, the son of the blessed one?
Jesus said, I am.
And you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of the power and coming with the clouds of heaven.
Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, why do we still need witnesses?
You have heard his blasphemy.
What is your decision?
All of them condemned him as deserving death.
Some began to spit on him, to blindfold him, and to strike him, saying to him, prophesy.
The guards also took him and beat him.
While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the female servants of the high priest came by.
When she saw Peter warming himself, she stared at him and said, you also were with Jesus, the man from Nazareth.
But he denied it saying, I do not know or understand what you are talking about.
And he went out into the forecourt.
Then the cock crowed.
And the female servant on seeing him began again to say to the bystanders, this man is one of them.
But again he denied it.
Then after a little while, the bystanders again said to Peter, certainly you are one of them for you are a Galilean and you talk like one.
But he began to curse and he swore an oath
I do not know this man you are talking about.
At that moment, the cock crowed for the second time.
Then Peter remembered that Jesus had said to him, before the cock crows twice, you will deny me three times.
And he broke down and wept.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Thanks be to God.
Let us pray.
Oh God, we've come expecting a word from you.
So speak Lord, for your servants are listening.
Hide this your servant behind that old rugged cross that everything that is said and everything that is heard comes straight from you.
Oh God, this is your servant's prayer.
In the name of Jesus the Christ, we pray.
Amen.
I must admit that I didn't really pay much attention to this text because before 2011-ish, we read this text sort of haphazardly and offhand during Holy Week, but we don't really dig into it.
We don't really pay attention to the details.
We gloss over the story.
But in 2011, I went to the Holy Land and on that ordinary,
ordination trip we went to the house of Caiaphas the high priest and we went to the courtyard and we went to the forecourt and we went down in Caiaphas's house where they held Jesus overnight before they took him to Pontius Pilate and beat on him some more.
And down in the bottom of Caiaphas' house where they held Jesus, they put all of us, like 30 of us, in this little bitty basement where they held Jesus, and it couldn't hold all of us.
It was so small.
It was like a round cistern under the ground.
And then,
Then the Reverend Joyce Bengus Gross and the Reverend Dr. Rodney Smothers, they started singing.
Great is thy faithfulness.
Morning by morning new mercies I see all
all I have needed.
You don't hear me this morning.
The hand half provided, standing in the place where Jesus was bleeding, standing in the place where Jesus was waiting for his death sentence, standing in the place where Jesus was experiencing a kind of opposition that many of us will never see in our lives.
Great is thy faithfulness.
Lord unto me.
Standing in that place, it feels weary.
It feels odd.
There's a banging silence that will make you shudder.
And yet when you come up from there and you come out of the house, it's the most beautiful landscape you've ever seen.
Wildflowers on the hillside in the middle of the desert.
The sun shines there all the time.
And the wind blows to let you know that the spirit of God is there.
But think about it.
Think about this.
Remember Jesus has been traveling.
He's been walking a lot and he's been talking a lot.
And while he's traveling and while he's walking and while he's talking, he is indeed healing people.
He is providing for people.
He is messing with Caiaphas' business.
You see, Caiaphas was in the business of making money for the temple.
Caiaphas, the high priest, had two jobs, keep the people in line and make money.
And he made money off of people by helping them understand that God would do something for them in exchange for their money.
So if Jesus is healing the people on the way back to Jerusalem, He's cutting into Caiaphas' pocket.
Because Jesus is healing people for free.
He's raising people from the dead.
Scales are falling off of people's skin.
They are being reintegrated, restored, and renewed into the community again in a way they thought would never happen.
This, my friends, is the kind of opposition that God expects from us.
So many times our opposition is about us.
We push back when it hits our bottom line.
We push back if it affects our people.
We push back if it interrupts or seeks to interrupt our way of living.
And even if it's unjust, we just let it go if it doesn't affect us.
That's none of my business.
But God calls us to the business of justice.
God calls us to the business of calling out injustice.
God calls us to the business of opposition when the status quo is against what God has called us to do.
Jesus and the disciples have traveled and Peter has been chief among them.
He's been the ringleader.
He's been the one that says, God, I got this.
He's the one who was supposed to understand because Jesus has said to them over and over again, I'm going to die.
You need to understand this trip to Jerusalem is the last trip we are going to take.
You need to understand this Passover meal is the last Passover meal we are going to celebrate together in the flesh.
You need to understand these words that I'm telling you are no longer just words.
They are life itself.
No need to be surprised.
I go to die so that you might have life and have it in abundance.
So while the people were sitting around the table, Jesus said, somebody here is going to betray me.
And Peter was the first to speak up.
He says, it's not going to be me.
And Jesus said, no, you won't be the one to betray me, but you'll be the one to deny me.
You're going to deny me three times before the cock crows.
And you who think you are faithful will scatter like goats chased by a wolf and act like none of this ever happened.
The thing about Peter is he showed up.
Where are the rest?
on this way to Caiaphas' house after the Passover meal.
Peter and another disciple and Jesus went into the Garden of Gethsemane and Jesus said, watch and pray.
Watch and pray.
And instead they slept.
And Jesus says, you can't even stay awake.
How do you think you are going to follow me?
Sometimes our opposition is staying awake.
Sometimes our opposition is staying on our knees.
Sometimes our opposition is staying in prayer.
Not my will, Lord, but thy will be done.
That's what Jesus was praying in the Garden of Gethsemane.
If you'll take this cup from me, I won't be mad, but if you won't take the cup, have your way, God, and I'll go all the way with you, Lord.
I'll do what you ask me to do, Lord.
I will push through, Lord.
Lay down my life Lord.
And while he was praying they came to get Jesus.
You see Peter wasn't only the ringleader, he was also the swiftest tempered.
And Peter pulled out a sword and he cut off one of the guard's ears.
And it's amazing to me that Jesus put his hand on the ear and the ear was healed.
It grew back and it was healed and they didn't stop there.
They kept arresting Jesus in the midst of this miracle.
In the midst of this opposition, they did not stop the evil that they were doing.
They kept on as if it would get them what they thought it would get them.
We don't know anything about that, do we?
God does the miracle for us.
And we keep on doing what we want to do.
God answers the prayer for us.
And we keep on worrying.
God fights the battle for us.
And we keep on being angry.
God heals us.
And we keep on acting like we're sick.
God does it.
And we keep acting like we're in charge.
God shows up.
And we act like we're blind.
God says peace and we drop bombs.
The opposition is an opportunity to follow the Lord.
The opposition is an opportunity to live like Jesus.
The opposition is an opportunity to be more like Christ.
The opposition is an opportunity to stand counter culturally and to say, I hear you Lord, seek peace and pursue it.
They arrested Jesus and Peter followed.
The rest scattered.
And Peter blended in with the guards.
And he said, let me just stand back and watch.
How many of us have done that?
In the midst of chaos, we just stand back and watch.
We don't act.
We don't pray.
We don't fast.
We don't surrender.
You know what happens when there is an accident on the interstate and people just watch?
The traffic gets worse and more accidents happen because we're not paying attention to what is in front of us.
We're not paying attention to the opportunities that God is giving us, but we are so
fixed on what's going on outside of us that we can't see what is going.
The Gospel of Luke says she was a little servant girl.
The Gospel of Mark just says she was a servant.
She has no name.
We don't know anything about her occupation.
Because see, slaves at that time, they could be slaves for a time.
And some of them could be doctors and some of them could be lawyers, but she was a servant in the high priest house and she was out in the court.
So we might imagine, even though we don't know this, that she was one that was servicing the guards, that she may have been giving a drink of water.
She may have been passing through to hang the laundry.
We don't know why she was there.
We don't know her age.
We don't know her story.
We don't know where she came from, but every time I hear this text, I hear the servant girl say, aren't you one of them?
Aren't you one of those Jesus followers?
But what if she said,
Aren't you one of those followers of Jesus?
Don't you know that man they just drug down there?
That's a different conversation.
One is accusatory.
One is invitational.
Opposition allows us to choose.
Are we going to be accusatory or are we going to be invitational?
Is it an opportunity to be curious or is it an opportunity to bust somebody out?
Is it an opportunity to learn something different, to hear something differently?
Or do we shut down because I don't want to hear that?
That doesn't align with what I believe.
Because if the servant girl was pushing on Peter to out him to say, oh, here's another one of him, drag him down there too, then that opposition is the kind of opposition that we've grown used to.
That's the kind of opposition that we like.
That's the fight that we pick.
But if the servant girl was more like five-year-old Izzy, hey, hey, hey, are you one of them?
Then that kind of opposition is the kind that wants us to know more.
It's the kind that draws us in.
It's the kind that makes us wonder.
It is the kind that allows us to stand up a little bit and feel a little bit more secure and understand that there is more to this.
And so many of us are so wrapped up like Peter.
that all we can hear is the accusatory opposition.
When God is asking us to hear the invitational opposition, all we can hear is, aren't you one of them?
When God is using somebody to ask us, who do you say that you are?
The hymn said, take my life and let it be consecrated, Lord to thee.
Opposition is not the worst thing that can happen in life.
Ignoring it, reacting,
acting out, lashing out, not exploring what God might be saying to us, that's the worst thing that can happen.
Because what we do is we shut down opportunities for the Spirit to speak to us.
We shut down opportunities for the Holy Spirit to blow a fresh wind and a fresh fire in and through our lives.
We shut down opportunities for God to heal us, for God to sustain us, for God to restore us, for God to broaden our worldview so that we can see that in this life there will be opposition, there will be trouble, and God
I will be in the midst of it always.
Peter said, I don't know what you're talking about.
I don't know him.
But just an hour ago, Peter said, it won't be me, Lord.
It won't be me, Lord.
And Jesus says, it will be you, Peter.
But let's just be clear here, we will not always get it right.
And God will give us another opportunity to practice being more like God.
Then they said, that girl might be onto something.
And they say, you talk like a Galilean.
You're not from around here.
You're not from these parts.
You must be one of them.
Humans were created to belong.
We were created for community.
We were created to be loved.
And so we will do some crazy stuff to fit in.
And God is saying, stand out.
Did you hear that this morning?
We will do some crazy stuff to fit in, but God is saying stand out.
Let the opposition pull you out of the status quo.
Let the opposition draw you closer to the most high God.
Allow the opposition to let the cross be lifted up in you and through you and because of the way that you have loved somebody.
Because if we arrive at Easter, the same way we arrived at last Easter, we have missed the point.
If we arrive at this Easter, hating the same people we hated last Easter, we have not encountered the Most High God.
If we arrive at this Easter, worrying about the same things we were worried about last Easter, we have not trusted in the Lord.
If we arrive at this Easter, the same moody, swingy, that we were last Easter, we have not been transformed.
When the cock crowed, not the first time, but when the cock crowed the second time, Peter remembered what Jesus said.
I don't know how he forgot.
The one who you say you love,
The one who you say you serve has been arrested and beat and publicly mocked.
And he's told him, you're gonna deny me.
But in the midst of the denial, you forget.
And when the cock crows the second time, oh, wait.
And the only thing he could do was weep.
And when I read that sentence in the text, all I can hear is the Old Testament, the Psalmist say, and a voice cries out in Rama.
And she weeps for her children.
Expect opposition.
But react to it in an unlikely way.
Did you hear that this morning?
Expect opposition in this life, but react to it in an unlikely way.
Don't go off.
Don't shut down.
Don't give in.
But step back and say, Lord, what are you trying to tell me?
What are you trying to teach me?
What are you trying to show me?
Lord, how are you trying to draw me nearer to you?
How are you trying to make me more like you?
Lord, show me to the cross where you died.
Show me to the cross where you called my name.
Show me to the cross where you got up, oh God.
And you showed me the way forward.
Show me how to be more like you.
In every opposition, oh God, show me how to love more.
In every opposition, show me how to be more grateful.
In every opposition, show me how to be more kind.
In every opposition, Lord, take me to the cross.
In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, we pray.
Amen.